My Ancestors—Larry Harrigan, and my Early Education—Choice of a
Profession—First Start in Life.
“The sea, the sea,
” if not my mother, has been my nurse (and anything but a
dry one) from the earliest days of my recollection. I was born within the sound
of old ocean’s surges; I dabbled in salt water before I could run; and I have
floated on salt water, and have been well sprinkled with it too, from that time
to the present. It never occurred to me, indeed, that I could be anything but a
sailor. In my innocence, I pictured a life on the ocean wave as the happiest
allowed to mortals; and little did I wot of all the bumpings and thumpings, the
blows and the buffetings, I was destined to endure in the course of it. Y et, even
had I expected them, I feel very certain they would not have changed my
wishes. No, no. I was mightily mistaken with regard to the romance of the
thing, I own; but had I to begin life again, with all its dangers and hardships,
still I would choose the ocean for my home—the glorious navy of England for
my profession.
But now for my antecedents. I will not trouble the reader with many of them. I
was born at the family seat in the south of Ireland. My mother died while I
was very young, and my father, Colonel D’Arcy, who had seen much service
in the army and had been severely wounded, after a lingering illness, followed
her to the grave. During this time I was committed to the charge of Larry
Harrigan, the butler and family factotum; and, in truth, I desired no better
companion, for well did I love the old man. He was a seaman every inch of
him, from his cherished pigtail to the end of the timber toe on which he had
long stumped through the world. He had been coxswain to my maternal
grandfather, a captain in the navy, who was killed in action. Larry had gone to
sea with him as a lad, and they had seldom been separated. A few minutes
before his commander, in the moment of victory, lost his life, Larry had his leg
shot away; and on being paid off, he repaired to where my mother’s family
were residing. When my father married, he offered the old seaman an asylum
beneath his roof. He certainly did not eat the bread of idleness there, for no
one about the place was more generally useful. There was nothing he could
not do or make, and in spite of his loss of a limb, he was as active as most
people possessed with the usual complement of supporters.
Larry had loved my mother as his own child, and for her sake he loved me
more than anything else on earth. As he considered it a part of his duty to
instruct me in his own accomplishments, which being chiefly of a professional
character, I at a very early age became thoroughly initiated in the mysteries of
knotting, bending, and splicing, and similar nautical arts. I could point a rope,
work a Turk’s-head, or turn in an eye, as well as many an A.B. Not content
with this, he built me a model of a ship, with her rigging complete. He then set
to work to teach me the names of every rope and spar; and when I knew them
and their uses, he unrigged the ship and made me rig her again under his
inspection. This I did several times, till he considered I was perfect. He next
bought fresh stuff for a new suit of rigging, and made me cut it into proper
lengths and turn it all in correctly before I set it up.
“Now you see, Master Neil,
” said he,
“we’ve just got the lovely Psyche out of
the hands of the shipwrights, and it’s our duty to get the rigging over her
mastheads, and fit her for sea as fast as the work can be done; so let’s see how
soon we can do the job.
”
Such were our indoor amusements, and thus I rapidly acquired an amount of
knowledge which most midshipmen take a long time to get stowed away in
their heads. Larry also used to take me out on the waters of the bay, and taught
me to row and to manage the sails of a small boat with tolerable dexterity. I
learned also to swim; and had it not been for my possession of that art, I
should probably long ago have been food for fishes. And here I must
endeavour strongly to impress on the minds of my young readers the
importance of learning to swim well; for not only may they thus be enabled to
save their own lives, but they may have the happiness of preserving those of
their fellow-creatures.
While my poor father lived, he attended to the more intellectual branches of
my education. My mother taught me to read, and for her sake I loved reading.
She also instilled those religious principles into me which have been my
support through life. Short and fleeting as was the time she remained on earth,
inestimable were the blessings she bestowed on me. Whatever of the milk of
human kindness flows round my heart, from her gentle bosom I drew it forth;
and surely I do not err when I believe that her earnest prayers before the
throne of mercy have caused watchful spirits to shield me from the perils of
the stormy ocean, and from still greater dangers, the treacherous quicksands
and dark rocks which have laid in my course through life.
I was ten years old before it occurred to any one that a little of the discipline of
a school might be beneficial to me, to prepare me somewhat better than I
could be prepared at home to rough it in the rude world into which I was ere
long to be plunged. To the academy, therefore, of a certain Doctor Studdert,
near Cork, I was sent, where I contrived to pick up a few crumbs of
knowledge and some experience of life. I had no great dislike to school, but
liked home much better; and no one sung—
“Packing up and going away,
All for the sake of a holiday,
”
more joyously than did I when my first midsummer holiday came round.
Larry was on the watch for me as I jumped out of the carriage which had been
sent over to Kerry to meet me. The old seaman had expected me to come back
a prodigy of learning; but was horrified to discover that I was puzzled how to
make a carrick-bend, and had nearly forgotten the length of the Psyche’s main-
top bowline.
“And that’s what the Doctor calls schooling, does he, Master Neil?” he
exclaimed, indignantly.
“Now I’ll make bold to say that among all the bigwigs
he has under him, including himself, there isn’t one on ’em knows how to
gammon a bowsprit or turn in a dead-eye. Now, to my mind, if they can’t give
you more larning than you’ve got since you’ve been away, you’d better stop at
home altogether.
”
I agreed with Larry, but the higher authorities ruled otherwise; so back to
school I went at the end of the holidays, having regained all the nautical
knowledge I before possessed, with a little in addition.
I will pass over the sad time of my brave father’s death. I was left to the
guardianship of my uncle, Counsellor D’Arcy, the great Dublin barrister, and
of Doctor Driscoll. I was removed to the house of the latter, with poor Larry,
who threatened to do all sorts of dreadful deeds, if he were not allowed to
accompany me. My patrimony, which had become somewhat attenuated, was
in the meantime put out to nurse. I was rather surprised at not being sent back
to school, when one day the Doctor, as he sat cross-legged before the fire after
dinner, rubbing his shins, called me to him.
“Neil, my boy, your uncle, Counsellor D’Arcy, has requested me to speak to
you on a very important subject. It is time, he thinks, that your studies should
be directed to fit you for the profession you may select. What would you wish
to be, now? Have you ever thought on the matter? Would you like to follow
his steps, and study the law; or those of your honoured father, and enter the
army; or those of your grandfather, and go to sea; or would you like to become
a merchant, or a clergyman; or what do you say to the practice of medicine?”
“That I would never take a drop, if I could help it, Doctor; or give it to others
either,
” I answered.
“I fear that I should make a bad minister, and a worse
merchant; and as for the law, I would not change places with the Counsellor
himself, if he were to ask me. I should have no objection to the army; but if
I’m to choose my profession, I’ll go to sea, by all means. I’ve no fancy for any
but a sea life; but I’ll just go and talk the matter over with Larry, and hear what
he thinks about it.
”
The Doctor said nothing. He considered, I conclude, that he had obeyed my
uncle’s wishes in proposing the matter to me, and his conscience was at rest. I
forthwith ran off and broached the subject to Larry; not that I doubted what his
advice would be. The old seaman gave a hitch to the waistband of his trousers,
as he replied, with no little animation—
“Why, you see, Master Neil, to my mind there’s only one calling which a man,
who is anything of a man, would wish to follow. The others are all very well in
their way: the parsons, and the soldiers, and the big-wigged lawyers, and the
merchants, and the doctors, and the ‘’plomatics’
—them who goes abroad to
desave the furriners, and takes up so much room and gives themselves such
airs aboard ship; but what, just let me ax, is the best on ’em when you puts
him alongside a right honest, thorough-bred seaman? What’s the proudest on
’em, when it comes to blow half a capful of wind? What’s the boldest on ’em
in a dark night, on a lee shore? Not one on ’em is worth that!” and he snapped
his fingers to show his contempt for landsmen of every degree.
“On course,
Master Neil, dear, you’ll be a seaman. With my will, the navy is the only
calling your blessed mother’s son should follow. Y our grandfather died in it,
and your great-grandfather before him; and I hope to see you in command of
one of His Majesty’s ships before I die—that I do. But I was forgetting that
you were growing so big, and that you would be going off to sea so soon,
”
continued the old man, in an altered tone.
“Y ou’ll remember, for his sake, all
the lessons Larry gave you, Master Neil? And you’ll think of your old friend
sometimes in a night watch, won’t you, now?”
I assured him that I would often think of him, and try not to forget any of his
lessons. I then went back to the Doctor, to inform him that Larry agreed with
me that the navy was the only profession likely to suit me.
My future calling being thus speedily settled, Doctor Driscoll, who was aware
that knowledge would not come by intuition, sent me to an old master in the
navy, who fortunately resided in the neighbourhood, to be instructed in the
rudiments of navigation. As I was as wide awake as most youngsters of my
age, I very soon gained a fair insight into its mysteries; and by the time the
spring came round, I was pronounced fit for duty.
A brother of my mother’s, who commanded a large revenue cutter on the south
coast of England, having been applied to for advice by the Doctor, answered
by the following short —
“Dear Sir,
—I’ll make a seaman of Neil, with all my heart, if you will send him
across to Portsmouth. Let him inquire for me at the ‘Star and Garter.
’ Should I
be away on a cruise, I will leave word with the landlady what is to be done
with him. My craft is the Serpent.
“I remain, faithfully yours,
—
“Terence O’Flaherty.
”
“What! send the child all the way over to Portsmouth by himself!” exclaimed
good Mrs Driscoll, the Doctor’s wife, on hearing the contents of this epistle.
“Why, he might be spirited off to the Plantations or the Black Hole of
Calcutta, and we never hear any more about him. What could Mr O’Flaherty
be thinking about?”
“That his nephew is about to be an officer in His Majesty’s service, and that
the sooner he learns to take care of himself, the better,
” replied the Doctor.
“Let him begin, then, by slow degrees, as birds are taught to fly,
” urged the
kind dame.
“He has never been out of the nest yet, except to school, when he
was put in charge of the coachman, like a parcel.
”
“He will find his way safe enough,
” muttered the Doctor.
“Won’t you, Neil?”
To speak the truth, I would gladly have undertaken to find my way to
Timbuctoo, or the Antipodes, by myself; but I had just formed a plan which I
was afraid might be frustrated, had I agreed with the Doctor. I therefore
answered,
“I’ll go and ask Larry;” and without waiting for any further
observations, off I ran, to put it in train. It was, that Larry should accompany
me to Portsmouth; and I had also a notion that he might be able to go to sea
with me. He was delighted with my plan, and backing Mrs Driscoll’s
objections to my being sent alone, it was finally arranged that he should take
charge of me till he had handed me over to my uncle. Such parts of my outfit
as could be manufactured at home, Mrs Driscoll got ready for me, and Larry
was empowered to procure the rest for me at Portsmouth.
I confess that I did not shed a tear or cast a look of regret at my birthplace; but
with a heart as light as a skylark taking his morning flight, I mounted
alongside Larry on the top of the coach bound for Dublin. While in that city
we saw my uncle, the Counsellor. I do not remember profiting much by the
visit. He, however, shook me kindly by the hand, and wishing me every
success, charged Larry to take care of me.
“Arrah!” muttered the old man as we walked away,
“his honour, sure, would
be after telling a hen to take care of her chickens now.
”
In London we put up at an inn at the west end, near Exeter ’Change; and while
dinner was getting ready, we went to see the wild beasts which dwelt there in
those days. I thought London a very smoky, dismal city, and that is all I can
remember about it.
Larry was rigged for the journey in a suit of black; and though he would have
been known, however dressed, by every one for a seaman, he was always
taken for an officer of the old school, and was treated accordingly with
becoming respect. Indeed, there was an expression of mild firmness and of
unassuming self-confidence in his countenance, added to his silvery locks and
his handsome though weather-beaten features, which commanded it.
We spent only one night in London; and by five o’clock in the afternoon of the
day we left it we were rattling down the High Street of Portsmouth, on the top
of the fast coach, while the guard played “See the Conquering Hero Comes”
—
which I had some notion he did in compliment to me.
I thought Portsmouth a much nicer place than London (in which idea some
people, perhaps, will not agree with me); while I looked upon the “Star and
Garter,
” where we stopped, as a very fine hotel, though not equal in dignity to
the “George.
” My chest, made under Larry’s superintendence, showed that its
owner was destined for the sea. Taking my hand, Larry stumped up the
passage, following the said chest and the bag which contained his wardrobe.
“What ship has your son come to join?” asked good Mrs Timmins, the
landlady, curtseying, as she encountered us.
“Faith, marm, it’s not after being the son of the likes of me is Master D’Arcy
here,
” he answered, pleased at the same time at the dignity thus conferred on
him.
“This is the nephew, marm, of Lieutenant O’Flaherty of His Majesty’s
cutter, the Serpent; and I’ll make bold to ax whether she’s in the harbour, and
what directions the Lieutenant has left about his nephew?”
“Oh dear, now, the cutter sailed this very morning for the westward,
”
answered the landlady; “that is unfortunate! And so this young gentleman is
Lieutenant O’Flaherty’s nephew. Well, then, we must take good care of him,
as she won’t be back for a week; and you know, mister, you needn’t trouble
yourself more about him.
”
“Faith, marm, it’s not I will be after leaving the young master till I see him
safe in his uncle’s hands,
” answered Larry, with a rap on his thigh.
“So I’ll just
trouble you to give us a room with a couple of beds in it, and we’ll take up our
quarters here till the cutter comes back.
”
This arrangement of course pleased the worthy Mrs Timmins, as she got two
guests instead of one; and I thus found myself established for a week at
Portsmouth. Having selected our chamber, we went into the coffee-room and
ordered dinner. There were several youngsters there, and other junior officers
of the profession, for the “Star and Garter” was at that time more frequented
than the far-famed “Blue Posts.
” At first some of the younger portion of the
guests were a little inclined to look superciliously at Larry and me; but he
stuck out his timber toe, and returned their glances with such calm
independence, that they soon suspected he was not made of the stuff to laugh
at; and they then showed an evident disposition to enter into conversation with
him to discover who he could be. This, for my sake, he did not wish them to
do; for, as he was to act the part of guardian, he thought it incumbent on him
to keep up his dignity.
We passed, to me, a very interesting time at Portsmouth. We constantly visited
the dockyard, which was my delight. He took me over theVictory, and showed
me the spot where Nelson fell; and with old associations many a tale and
anecdote which, long since forgotten, now returned to his memory, he poured
into my eager ear.
Some people declare, and naval men even do so, that there’s no romance in a
seafaring life—that it’s all hard, dirty, slaving work, without anything to repay
one, except prize-money in war time and promotion in peace. Now, to my
mind, there’s a great deal of romance and chivalry and excitement, and ample
recompense in the life itself; and this Larry, who ought to have known, for he
had seen plenty of hard service, had himself discovered. It is that some do not
know where to look for the romance, and if found, cannot appreciate it. The
stern realities of a sea life—its hardships, its dangers, its battles, its fierce
contests with the elements, its triumphs over difficulties—afford to some souls
a pleasure which ignobler ones cannot feel: I trust that my adventures will
explain what I mean. For my own part, I can say that oftentimes have I
enjoyed that intense pleasure, that joyous enthusiasm, that high excitement,
which not only recompenses one for the toil and hardships by which it is won,
but truly makes them as nothing in comparison to the former. All I can say is,
let me go through the world sharing the rough and the smooth alike—the
storms and sunshine of life; but save me from the stagnant existence of the
man who sleeps on a feather bed and always keeps out of danger.